\section*{Abstract}

Continuous monitoring using wearable devices offers a promising avenue for early detection and proactive management of adverse health events, including mental health crises. In this study, we present an AI powered predictive framework that fuses multi modal physiological data (from interstitial glucose and heart rate to accelerometry and respiratory signals) into personalized digital biomarkers. A key innovation of our approach is a novel algorithm for estimating respiratory rate from photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals. Although PPG primarily measures blood volume changes, subtle modulations induced by breathing can be isolated through advanced signal processing. Our algorithm preprocesses the PPG by removing baseline drifts and extracting its amplitude envelope via the Hilbert transform. We subsequently apply a Butterworth bandpass filter to isolate respiratory frequencies (0.1 to 0.5 Hz) and perform a fast Fourier transform over sliding windows to extract the dominant respiratory frequency, converting it into breaths per minute. In addition, we measure respiratory induced frequency variation (RIFV), intensity variation (RIIV), and amplitude variation (RIAV) by analyzing the spectral content of these three complementary facets via autoregressive models. Together, these measures provide a robust, dynamic picture of an individual’s breathing pattern that aligns well with manual breath annotations.
Integrating this respiratory marker with other wearable signals enables the system to establish personalized baselines and detect meaningful deviations, such as altered sleep, reduced physical activity, or irregular social interactions, which may serve as early warning signs of impending mental health crises. Preliminary pilot studies indicate that this multi parameter framework achieves high predictive accuracy, offering timely alerts and tailored interventions. While challenges around data privacy and sustained user engagement persist, our work represents a significant step toward leveraging noninvasive, real time data streams to empower individuals and improve clinical care through proactive mental health management.
