\section*{Related Works}

Research on heart rate variability (HRV) as a biomarker for stress and psychological distress has grown steadily over the past decade. For example, Shaffer et al. (2014) provided an integrative review elucidating HRV’s strong association with autonomic regulation and mental health outcomes. Meta-analyses further support HRV's predictive ability in identifying psychological strain, and recent studies employing AI-driven approaches have refined stress prediction by enhancing real-time monitoring accuracy and responsiveness.

Parallel to advances in HRV research, digital phenotyping has emerged as a powerful tool for continuously tracking both behavioral and physiological data. Platforms such as the Beiwe research framework by the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health have established structured methods to combine digital behavior logs with biometrics. These approaches not only bolster early detection of mental health conditions but have also generated robust discussions regarding privacy and data security in continuous monitoring.

Recent advances in wearable technology have extended the repertoire of digital biomarkers beyond HRV. Studies like Bent et al. (2021) demonstrate that interstitial glucose measurements from noninvasive smartwatches can provide critical health insights when analyzed for glycemic variability. Similarly, techniques for extracting respiratory rate from photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals have shown that subtle breathing-induced modulations—such as respiratory-induced frequency, intensity, and amplitude variations—can be effectively quantified using advanced signal processing and autoregressive spectral analysis. These novel biomarkers complement HRV data by offering a richer picture of autonomic function and stress reactivity.

In addition, research on learned helplessness has highlighted the role of recurrent, uncontrollable stress in fostering maladaptive cognitive patterns. Intervention strategies that counteract these responses are being actively explored by groups such as Carepatron and Mind.Help, reinforcing the importance of early, targeted intervention. AI-driven models that detect early signs of disengagement further confirm the potential for proactive mental health support.

Finally, multimodal data fusion techniques have emerged to integrate biometric, behavioral, and contextual data into a unified framework. Methods such as probabilistic canonical correlation analysis have been applied to manage incomplete datasets while enhancing the predictive capability of AI models. This integrated approach promises more timely, precise, and personalized support systems in mental health care.

Collectively, these studies form the foundation for our work. By leveraging advancements in HRV analysis, digital phenotyping, wearable sensor data, and multimodal data fusion, our research aims to advance predictive digital biomarker research and enable proactive mental health interventions.